PMM-11278 QAN under the hood. (#1239)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/details/query-analytics.md

- The collected data is represented by "buckets."

## Understanding buckets
- A bucket contains all the data captured during a one-minute interval.

-  Once a bucket is created, it is sent to the PMM Server, where it is parsed and saved in the ClickHouse database. All QAN-related data is stored in ClickHouse, which can be either part of the PMM Server or an external instance.

- queries in buckets are aggregated by query ID, which means that all queries with the same query ID are represented by a single row in the Overview panel.
- Query IDs are calculated differently depending on the database technology and query source.
**MySQL**   
For MySQL, the query ID is based on the DIGEST value (for Performance Schema) or the MD5 checksum of the fingerprint (for slow log).

DIGEST (Perfschema) and fingerprint (Slowlog) are same. It is query without sensitive data. In case below both queries will have **same query ID**. The DIGEST value is generated from the query text without sensitive data.
    ```sh
    INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe'); 
    INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 
    ``` 

>     - **Perfschema** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perfschema
```

>         - The query ID is based on the DIGEST (fingerprint) value from the `events_statements_summary_by_digest` table in the mysql database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- The query ID is based on the DIGEST (fingerprint) value from the `events_statements_summary_by_digest` table in the mysql database.
```

>         - The DIGEST value for the same query may differ across MySQL versions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DIGEST value for the same query may differ across MySQL versions. 
```

>         - The DIGEST is generated from the query text without sensitive data (DIGEST_TEXT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DIGEST is generated from the query text without sensitive data (DIGEST_TEXT).
```

>         - In MySQL 8.0 and higher, you can use the STATEMENT_DIGEST("your query") function to obtain the DIGEST (query ID) for a given query. See the [MySQL official documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/encryption-functions.html#function_statement-digest) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In MySQL 8.0 and higher, you can use the STATEMENT_DIGEST("your query") function to obtain the DIGEST (query ID) for a given query. See the [MySQL official documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/encryption-functions.html#function_statement-digest) for more details.
```

>     - **Slowlog** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Slowlog

```

>         - The query ID is the MD5 checksum of the query fingerprint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The query ID is the MD5 checksum of the query fingerprint.
```

> ## Sources for data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sources for data

```

MySQL Performance Schema: The `events_statements_summary_by_digest` and `events_statements_history` tables in the `mysql` database.
- MySQL Slow Log: The slow log file specified during MySQL configuration.
- PostgreSQL pg_stat_statements (PGSS): The `pg_stat_statements` view in the required database.
- PostgreSQL pg_stat_monitor (PGSM): The `pg_stat_monitor` view in the required database.

## Examples
### Example 1: MySQL with Performance Schema or Slow Log

**Timeline**   
**8:05:05:** You start the pmm-agent.

**8:05:20:** You execute the following queries:
```sh 
CREATE TABLE people (FirstName varchar(255), LastName varchar(255));
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith');
```
**8:05:25:** The queries finish executing.

**8:06:00:** The buckets are collected and sent to the PMM Server. Head back to QAN.

**8:06:10:** Here, you should see two rows in the QAN Overview Panel (depending on the filter settings and time range):

> ![QAN MySQL Example 1 List Overview](../_images/PMM_Query_Analytics_Example1_Overview.png) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![QAN MySQL Example 1 List Overview](../_images/PMM_Query_Analytics_Example1_Overview.png) 

```

Let's answer some questions about the image above.   

> **Question:** Why does the query look slightly different in the Overview list?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Question:** Why does the query look slightly different in the Overview list?

```

**Answer:** The query is the same, but sensitive data (e.g., 'Joe', 'John') is replaced by placeholders like "?", "?+", or "..." in the Overview list.

> **Question:** We triggered two INSERT queries, but there is only one row in the list overview. Why?   

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Question:** We triggered two INSERT queries, but there is only one row in the list overview. Why?   
```

> **Answer:** For the executed queries: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Answer:** For the executed queries below, query ID will be the same which is why they are aggregated into a single row in the Overview list. However, in the Details panel, you should still see the actual count of how many times the query was executed. As you can see in the image below, the count for the INSERT query is 2 in the Details panel, which matches the number of times we executed the INSERT query.

```

```sh 
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith');
``` 

> query ID will be the same which is why they are aggregated into a single row in the Overview list. However, in the Details panel, you should still see the actual count of how many times the query was executed. As you can see in the image below, the count for the INSERT query is 2 in the Details panel, which matches the number of times we executed the INSERT query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

![QAN MySQL Example 1 Details](../_images/PMM_Query_Analytics_Example1_Details.png)

### Example 2: MySQL with Performance Schema or Slow Log, Query Execution Split Across Two Buckets
**Timeline**   
**8:05:55:** You start pmm-agent. 

**8:05:59:** You execute the following queries: 
```sh
CREATE TABLE people (FirstName varchar(255), LastName varchar(255));
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 
``` 
**8:06:00:** The first bucket is collected and sent to the PMM Server. The queries executed so far are included in this bucket and can be found in QAN for the time range 8:05:00-8:06:00.

**8:06:01:** The queries finish executing.

**8:07:00:** The second bucket is collected and sent to the PMM Server. The remaining executed queries are included in this bucket and are now visible in QAN.

**8:07:10:** You should see two rows in the QAN Overview Panel (depending on the filter settings and time range):

> Now let's take a look at results with different time range filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's take a look at results with different time range filters.

```

# Query analytics under the hood

## Components
1. [Filters Panel](../get-started/./query-analytics.md#filters-panel)
2. [Overview Panel](../get-started./query-analytics.md#overview-panel)
3. [Details Panel](../get-started./query-analytics.md#details-panel)

## How QAN collects data?
- data are collected every minute (at 0 seconds, like 8:15:00, next in 8:16:00 etc)

> - collected data are represented by buckets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The collected data is represented by "buckets."
```

> ## What is a bucket/How is it created?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understanding buckets
```

> - buckets contains all data captured during one minute interval

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A bucket contains all the data captured during a one-minute interval.

```

> - once a bucket is created it is sent to PMM Server where it is parsed and saved in the clickhouse database. All QAN related data is stored there. Clickhouse is part of PMM Server, or you can use an external one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Once a bucket is created, it is sent to the PMM Server, where it is parsed and saved in the ClickHouse database. All QAN-related data is stored in ClickHouse, which can be either part of the PMM Server or an external instance.

```

> - queries in buckets are aggregated by query ID. It means one row in list overview for all queries with same query ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- queries in buckets are aggregated by query ID, which means that all queries with the same query ID are represented by a single row in the Overview panel.
```

> - query IDs are calculated different depends on technology and query source  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Query IDs are calculated differently depending on the database technology and query source.
```

**MySQL**   

> DIGEST (Perfschema) and fingerprint (Slowlog) are same. It is query without sensitive data. In case below both queries will have **same query ID**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For MySQL, the query ID is based on the DIGEST value (for Performance Schema) or the MD5 checksum of the fingerprint (for slow log).

DIGEST (Perfschema) and fingerprint (Slowlog) are same. It is query without sensitive data. In case below both queries will have **same query ID**. The DIGEST value is generated from the query text without sensitive data.
```

    ```sh
    INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe'); 
    INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 
    ``` 
    - **Perfschema** 

>         - query ID is based on DIGEST (fingerprint) value from events_statements_summary_by_digest in mysql database 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - The query ID is based on the DIGEST (fingerprint) value from the `events_statements_summary_by_digest` table in the mysql database.

```

>         - DIGEST for same query could be different in different versions of MySQL 

Reviewer: - The DIGEST value for the same query may differ across MySQL versions.

>         - DIGEST is generated from query without sensitive data (DIGEST_TEXT)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - The DIGEST is generated from the query text without sensitive data (DIGEST_TEXT).

```

>         - with MySQL 8.0 and higher you can use function STATEMENT_DIGEST("your query") to get DIGEST (query ID). See more details on MySQL official website [here](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/encryption-functions.html#function_statement-digest "MySQL Perfschema digest details") 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - In MySQL 8.0 and higher, you can use the STATEMENT_DIGEST("your query") function to obtain the DIGEST (query ID) for a given query. See the [MySQL official documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/encryption-functions.html#function_statement-digest) for more details.
```

    - **Slowlog** 

>         - query ID is the MD5 checksum of fingerprint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - The query ID is the MD5 checksum of the query fingerprint.
```

## Sources for data

> - MySQL Perfschema: tables `events_statements_summary_by_digest` and `events_statements_history` in MySQL database called `mysql`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL Performance Schema: The `events_statements_summary_by_digest` and `events_statements_history` tables in the `mysql` database.
```

> - MySQL Slowlog: file on path provided during configuring your MySQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MySQL Slow Log: The slow log file specified during MySQL configuration.
```

> - PostgreSQL pg_stat_statements (PGSS): view `pg_stat_statements` in required database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PostgreSQL pg_stat_statements (PGSS): The `pg_stat_statements` view in the required database.
```

> - PostgreSQL pg_stat_statmonitor (PGSM): view `pg_stat_monitor` in required database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PostgreSQL pg_stat_monitor (PGSM): The `pg_stat_monitor` view in the required database.
```

## Examples

> ### 1. MySQL, query source perfschema/slowlog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example 1: MySQL with Performance Schema or Slow Log

```

**Timeline**   

> **8:05:05:** You started pmm-agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:05:05:** You start the pmm-agent.
```

> **8:05:20:** You executed queries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:05:20:** You execute the following queries:
```

```sh 
CREATE TABLE people (FirstName varchar(255), LastName varchar(255));
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith');
```

> **8:05:25:** Queries finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:05:25:** The queries finish executing.
```

> **8:06:00:** Buckets are collected and sent to PMM Server. Now go to QAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:06:00:** The buckets are collected and sent to the PMM Server. Head back to QAN.

```

> **8:06:10:** You should see two rows in QAN list overview (depends on settings of filter and time range):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:06:10:** Here, you should see two rows in the QAN Overview Panel (depending on the filter settings and time range):
```

![QAN MySQL Example 1 List Overview](../_images/PMM_Query_Analytics_Example1_Overview.png) 

> Lets answer some questions about the image above.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's answer some questions about the image above.   
```

> **Question:** Why is the query a little bit different in the list overview?   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Question:** Why does the query look slightly different in the Overview list?
```

> **Answer:** The query is the same, but sensitive data (Joe, John etc) are replaced by "?", "?+" or "..." in list overview  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Answer:** The query is the same, but sensitive data (e.g., 'Joe', 'John') is replaced by placeholders like "?", "?+", or "..." in the Overview list.
```

**Question:** We triggered two INSERT queries, but there is only one row in the list overview. Why?   

> **Answer:** for executed queries: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Answer:** For the executed queries: 
```

```sh 
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith');
``` 

> query ID will be the same and that is why it is aggregated as one row in the list overview. On the other hand in detail you still should see a real count of how many times the query was executed. As you can see in the image below. In detail the count for the INSERT query is 2. Since we executed the INSERT query 2 times it is correct and expected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
query ID will be the same which is why they are aggregated into a single row in the Overview list. However, in the Details panel, you should still see the actual count of how many times the query was executed. As you can see in the image below, the count for the INSERT query is 2 in the Details panel, which matches the number of times we executed the INSERT query.
```

![QAN MySQL Example 1 Details](../_images/PMM_Query_Analytics_Example1_Details.png)

> ### 2. MySQL, query source perfschema/slowlog, queries execution splitted over two buckets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example 2: MySQL with Performance Schema or Slow Log, Query Execution Split Across Two Buckets
```

**Timeline**   

> **8:05:55:** You started pmm-agent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:05:55:** You start pmm-agent. 
```

> **8:05:59:** You executed queries: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:05:59:** You execute the following queries: 
```

```sh
CREATE TABLE people (FirstName varchar(255), LastName varchar(255));
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe');
INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 
``` 

> **8:06:00:** Buckets are collected and sent to PMM Server. Already executed queries are included too in the bucket. Could be found in QAN already in range 8:05:00 - 8:06:00 or any other timestamp, which includes this minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:06:00:** The first bucket is collected and sent to the PMM Server. The queries executed so far are included in this bucket and can be found in QAN for the time range 8:05:00-8:06:00.
```

> **8:06:01:** Queries finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:06:01:** The queries finish executing.```

> **8:07:00:** Buckets are collected and sent to PMM Server. Rest of executed queries are included there and since now visible/increased in QAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:07:00:** The second bucket is collected and sent to the PMM Server. The remaining executed queries are included in this bucket and are now visible in QAN.
```

> **8:07:10:** You should see two rows in QAN list overview (depends on settings of filter and time range):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**8:07:10:** You should see two rows in the QAN Overview Panel (depending on the filter settings and time range):
```

Now let's take a look at results with different time range filters.

> 1. QAN with default time range filter (Last 12 hours) - two rows in overview (one for CREATE query, another for INSERT) - in details for INSERT query count is 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. QAN with default time range filter (Last 12 hours) - two rows in overview (one for CREATE query, another for INSERT). In the Details panel, the count for the INSERT query is 2.
```

> 2. Range 8:05:00 - 8:06:00 - one row in overview for CREATE query, because none of INSERT queries were executed by that time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Range 8:05:00 - 8:06:00 - one row in the Overview list for the CREATE query, because none of the INSERT queries were executed by that time
```

> 3. Range 8:06:00 - 8:07:00 - one row in overview for INSERT query, because CREATE query were sent in previous bucket - in details for INSERT query count is 2. Both queries were executed in this range

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Range 8:06:00 - 8:07:00 - One row in the Overview panel for the INSERT query because the CREATE query was sent in the previous bucket.
In the Details Panel, the count for the INSERT query is 2 since both queries were executed in this range.
```

> Always remember that it could take up to 2 minutes until all data are visible in QAN since execution is done. More technologies covered (PG, Mongo) with examples will be included in near future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that it may take up to 2 minutes for all the data to be visible in QAN after the queries have finished executing.

In the future, we will include examples covering more technologies (e.g., PostgreSQL, MongoDB) in this topic.
```

    - **MySQL Perfschema** 
        - query ID is based on DIGEST value from events_statements_summary_by_digest in mysql database 
        - DIGEST for same query could be different in different versions of MySQL 
        - DIGEST is generated from query without sensitive data (DIGEST_TEXT), so both queries below will have **same query ID** 
            ```sh 
            INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe'); 
            INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 
            ``` 
        - with MySQL 8.0 and higher you can use function STATEMENT_DIGEST("your query") to get DIGEST (query ID). See more details on MySQL official website [here](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/encryption-functions.html#function_statement-digest "MySQL Perfschema digest details") 
    - **MySQL Slowlog** 
        - query ID is the right-most 16 characters of the MD5 checksum of fingerprint 
        - fingerprint is query without sensitive data, so like in case of Perfschema both queries below will have **same query ID** 
            ```sh 
            INSERT INTO people VALUES ('Joe', 'Doe'); 
            INSERT INTO people VALUES ('John', 'Smith'); 

>             ``` 

Reviewer 2: I think we can move it one level above to not duplicate.
DIGEST_TEXT = fingerprint

Author: Moved.
